Revamped PCIe into new format and incorporated style guide (#4051)
ROCm/ROCm: docs/conceptual/More-about-how-ROCm-uses-PCIe-Atomics.rst

.. meta::
   :description: How ROCm uses PCIe atomics
   :keywords: PCIe, PCIe atomics, atomics, Atomic operations, AMD, ROCm

*****************************************************************************
How ROCm uses PCIe atomics
*****************************************************************************
AMD ROCm is an extension of the Heterogeneous System Architecture (HSA). To meet the requirements of an HSA-compliant system, ROCm supports queuing models, memory models, and signaling and synchronization protocols. ROCm can perform atomic Read-Modify-Write (RMW) transactions that extend inter-processor synchronization mechanisms to Input/Output (I/O) devices starting from Peripheral Component Interconnect Express 3.0 (PCIe™ 3.0). It supports the defined HSA capabilities for queuing and signaling memory operations. To learn more about the requirements of an HSA-compliant system, see the 
`HSA Platform System Architecture Specification <http://hsafoundation.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/HSA-SysArch-1.2.pdf>`_.

> ROCm uses platform atomics to perform memory operations like queuing, signaling, and synchronization across multiple CPU, GPU agents, and I/O devices. Platform atomics ensures that atomic operations run synchronously without interruptions or conflicts across multiple shared resources. Similarly, it enables memory alignment and synchronization of processing data within the shared memory locations and I/O devices.  This sections details how ROCm uses platform atomics and features of PCIe 3.0.

Author: Incorporated

Platform atomics in ROCm
==============================
Platform atomics enable the set of atomic operations that perform RMW actions across multiple processors, devices, and memory locations so that they run synchronously without interruption. An atomic operation is a sequence of computing instructions run as a single, indivisible unit. These instructions are completed in their entirety without any interruptions. If the instructions can't be completed as a unit without interruption, none of the instructions are run. These operations support 32-bit and 64-bit address formats.

ROCm uses platform atomics to:

* Update the HSA queue's ``read_dispatch_id``. The command processor on the GPU agent uses a 64-bit atomic add operation. It updates the packet ID it processed.
* Update the HSA queue's ``write_dispatch_id``. The CPU and GPU agents use a 64-bit atomic add operation. It supports multi-writer queue insertions.

> * Update HSA Signals. A 64-bit atomic operation is used for CPU & GPU synchronization.

Reviewer: This list is probably incomplete. It completely ignores the possibility that application shader programs can use atomic instructions which get translated into platform atomics if they target locations in system memory (at least for the supported subset of operations).

Author: Updated the intro text to present as some of the examples of operations, rather than the only operations in ROCm.

PCIe for atomic operations
----------------------------
ROCm requires CPUs that support PCIe atomics. Similarly, all connected I/O devices should also support PCIe atomics for optimum compatibility. PCIe supports the ``CAS`` (Compare and Swap), ``FetchADD``, and ``SWAP`` atomic operations across multiple resources. These atomic operations are initiated by the I/O devices that support 32-bit, 64-bit, and 128-bit operands. Likewise, the target memory address where these atomic operations are performed should also be aligned to the size of the operand. This alignment ensures that the operations are performed efficiently and correctly without failure. 

> When an atomic operation is successful, the requester receives a response of completion along with the operation result. However, any errors associated with the operation are signaled to the requester by updating the Completion Status field. Issues accessing the target location or running the atomic operation are common errors. Depending upon the error, the Completion Status field is updated to Completer Abort (CA) or Unsupported Request (UR). The field is present in the Completion Descriptor.

Reviewer: Who is the intended audience? This information seems irrelevant to people writing ROCm applications. This is going into details of the PCIe bus protocol for dealing with error conditions.

Author: This falls under the conceptual section, and the audience can be someone using the document to troubleshoot the error conditions as well.

To learn more about PCIe and its capabilities, consult the following white papers:

* `Atomic Read Modify Write Primitives by Intel <https://www.intel.es/content/dam/doc/white-paper/atomic-read-modify-write-primitives-i-o-devices-paper.pdf>`_
* `PCI Express 3 Accelerator White paper by Intel <https://www.intel.sg/content/dam/doc/white-paper/pci-express3-accelerator-white-paper.pdf>`_
* `PCIe Generation 4 Base Specification includes atomic operations <https://astralvx.com/storage/2020/11/PCI_Express_Base_4.0_Rev0.3_February19-2014.pdf>`_
* `Xilinx PCIe Ultrascale White paper <https://docs.xilinx.com/v/u/8OZSA2V1b1LLU2rRCDVGQw>`_

Working with PCIe 3.0 in ROCm
-------------------------------
Starting with PCIe 3.0, atomic operations can be requested, routed through, and completed by PCIe components. Routing and completion do not require software support. Component support for each can be identified by the Device Capabilities 2 (DevCap2) register. Upstream
bridges need to have atomic operations routing enabled. If not enabled, the atomic operations will fail even if the 
PCIe endpoint and PCIe I/O devices can perform atomic operations. 

> If your system uses PCIe Express Switch to connect and enable communication between multiple PCIe components, the switch must also support atomic operations routing.

Reviewer: "PCIe Express" is redundant since the "e" stands for "express". And there is a missing word here. This should either be "If your system uses PCIe switches ... the switches must also ..." or "If your system uses a PCIe switch ..."

> To enable atomic operations routing between multiple root ports, each root port must support atomic operation routing. This capability can be identified from the atomic operations routing supported bit in the DevCap2 register. If the bit has value of 1, routing is supported. Atomic operation requests are permitted only if a component's ``DEVCTL2.ATOMICOP_REQUESTER_ENABLE``

Reviewer: Again, who is the intended audience. This paragraph is not useful for end users. It seems to address someone implementing support for PCIe atomics  in an OS kernel.

Author: This is a conceptual section, and along with general user, it is also intended for advanced user installing, configuring, or troubleshooting ROCm.

field is set. These requests can only be serviced if the upstream components also support atomic operation
completion, or can route it to a component that supports it, or both.  

ROCm uses the PCIe-ID-based ordering technology for peer-to-peer (P2P) data transmission. PCIe-ID-based ordering technology is used when the GPU initiates multiple write operations to different memory locations. For example. when there are two write operations which need to be run in this order::

1. Write to another GPU memory.
2. Write to system memory to indicate the transfer is complete.

> The two write operations are routed to different locations. However, use of the ordering technology ensures that the order of the operation is maintained. 

Reviewer: This is not always true because our implementation is buggy and broken. There are HW blocks in our GPU that break PCIe ordering rules. It may be better to leave this out unless you want to go into excruciating detail.

.. meta::
   :description: How ROCm uses PCIe atomics
   :keywords: PCIe, PCIe atomics, atomics, Atomic operations, AMD, ROCm

*****************************************************************************
How ROCm uses PCIe atomics
*****************************************************************************

> AMD ROCm is an extension of the Heterogeneous System Architecture (HSA). To meet the requirements of an HSA-compliant system, ROCm supports queuing models, memory models, and signaling and synchronization protocols. ROCm can perform atomic Read-Modify-Write (RMW) transactions that extend inter-processor synchronization mechanisms to I/O devices starting from Peripheral Component Interconnect Express 3.0 (PCIe™ 3.0). It supports the defined HSA capabilities for queuing and signaling memory operations. To learn more about the requirements of an HSA-compliant system, see the 

Author: Keeping the full form for first occurrence.

`HSA Platform System Architecture Specification <http://hsafoundation.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/HSA-SysArch-1.2.pdf>`_.

> ROCm uses platform atomics to perform memory operations like queuing, signaling, and synchronization across multiple CPU, GPU agents, and I/O devices. Platform atomics ensures that atomic operations run synchronously without interruptions or conflicts across multiple shared resources. Similarly, it enables memory alignment and synchronization of processing data within the shared memory locations and Input/Output (I/O) devices.  This sections details how ROCm uses platform atomics and features of PCIe 3.0.

Author: Updated first occurrence and updated with I/O for ones that follows.

Platform atomics in ROCm
==============================

> Platform atomics enables the set of atomic operations that perform RMW actions across multiple processors, devices, and memory locations to execute synchronously without interruption. An atomic operation is a sequence of computing instructions executed as a single, indivisible unit. These instructions are completed in their entirety without any interruptions or are not executed. These operations support 32-bit and 64-bit address formats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Platform atomics enable the set of atomic operations that perform RMW actions across multiple processors, devices, and memory locations so that they execute synchronously without interruption. An atomic operation is a sequence of computing instructions run as a single, indivisible unit. These instructions are completed in their entirety without any interruptions. If the instructions can't be completed as a unit without interruption, none of the instructions are run. These operations support 32-bit and 64-bit address formats.
```

I forgot that we should use "run" instead of "executed". Also I added a clarifying statement. It's not perfect, but I felt it needed to be there. You can choose to leave it or fix it or remove it.

> ROCm uses platform atomics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ROCm uses platform atomics to:
```

* Update the HSA queue's ``read_dispatch_id``. The command processor on the GPU agent uses a 64-bit atomic add operation. It updates the packet ID it processed.
* Update the HSA queue's ``write_dispatch_id``. The CPU and GPU agents use a 64-bit atomic add operation. It supports multi-writer queue insertions.
* Update HSA Signals. A 64-bit atomic operation is used for CPU & GPU synchronization.

PCIe for atomic operations
----------------------------

> PCIe supports the ``CAS`` (Compare and Swap), ``FetchADD``, and ``SWAP`` atomic operations across multiple resource. These atomic operations are initiated by the I/O devices that support 32-bit, 64-bit, and 128-bit operands. Likewise, the target memory address where these atomic operations are performed should also be aligned to the size of the operand. This alignment ensures that the operations are performed efficiently and correctly without failure. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PCIe supports the ``CAS`` (Compare and Swap), ``FetchADD``, and ``SWAP`` atomic operations across multiple resources. These atomic operations are initiated by the I/O devices that support 32-bit, 64-bit, and 128-bit operands. Likewise, the target memory address where these atomic operations are performed should also be aligned to the size of the operand. This alignment ensures that the operations are performed efficiently and correctly without failure. 
```

Is it the devices that support the operands, or the operations. It's unclear.  From the next sentence I assume it's the devices. Maybe split the sentence for a bit more clarity?

> When an atomic operation is successful, the requester receives a response of completion along with the operation result. However, any errors associated with the operation, are signaled to the requester by updating the Completion Status field. Some common errors can be issues accessing the target location or executing the atomic operation. Depending upon the error, the Completion Status field is updated to Completer Abort (CA) or Unsupported Request (UR). The field is present in the Completion Descriptor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an atomic operation is successful, the requester receives a response of completion along with the operation result. However, any errors associated with the operation are signaled to the requester by updating the Completion Status field. Issues accessing the target location or executing the atomic operation are common errors. Depending upon the error, the Completion Status field is updated to Completer Abort (CA) or Unsupported Request (UR). The field is present in the Completion Descriptor.
```

To learn more about the industry standards and specifications of PCIe, see `PCI-SIG Specification <https://pcisig.com/specifications>`_.

To learn more about PCIe and its capabilities, consult the following white papers:

* `Atomic Read Modify Write Primitives by Intel <https://www.intel.es/content/dam/doc/white-paper/atomic-read-modify-write-primitives-i-o-devices-paper.pdf>`_
* `PCI Express 3 Accelerator White paper by Intel <https://www.intel.sg/content/dam/doc/white-paper/pci-express3-accelerator-white-paper.pdf>`_
* `PCIe Generation 4 Base Specification includes atomic operations <https://astralvx.com/storage/2020/11/PCI_Express_Base_4.0_Rev0.3_February19-2014.pdf>`_
* `Xilinx PCIe Ultrascale White paper <https://docs.xilinx.com/v/u/8OZSA2V1b1LLU2rRCDVGQw>`_

> Working of PCIe 3.0 in ROCm

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Working with PCIe 3.0 in ROCm
```

with?

-------------------------------

> Starting from PCIe 3.0, atomic operations can be requested, routed through, and completed by PCIe components. Routing and completion do not require software support. Component support for each can be identified by the Device Capabilities 2 (DevCap2) register. Upstream

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with PCIe 3.0, atomic operations can be requested, routed through, and completed by PCIe components. Routing and completion do not require software support. Component support for each can be identified by the Device Capabilities 2 (DevCap2) register. Upstream
```

bridges need to have atomic operations routing enabled. If not enabled, the atomic operations will fail even if the 
PCIe endpoint and PCIe I/O devices can perform atomic operations.

> To enable atomic operations routing between multiple Root Ports, each Root Port must support atomic operations routing. This capability can be identified from the atomic operations routing supported bit in the DevCap2 register. If the bit has value of 1, routing is supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable atomic operations routing between multiple root ports, each root port must support atomic operation routing. This capability can be identified from the atomic operations routing supported bit in the DevCap2 register. If the bit has value of 1, routing is supported.
```

I think root port isn't capitalized. But if it is, disregard this.

> If your system has a PCIe Express Switch, it must support atomic operations routing. Atomic

Reviewer 2: Is this that if the system has PCIe Express then it will support atomic operations or that you have to configure it to support atomic operations? Needs a bit more clarity.

Author: Updated the sentence.

> operations requests are permitted only if a component's ``DEVCTL2.ATOMICOP_REQUESTER_ENABLE``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
operation requests are permitted only if a component's ``DEVCTL2.ATOMICOP_REQUESTER_ENABLE``
```

field is set. These requests can only be serviced if the upstream components also support atomic operation

> completion, can route it to a component that supports it, or both. 

Reviewer 2: I think there's some words missing between "completion" and "can". Maybe a connecting word?

> ROCm also uses the PCIe-ID-based ordering technology for peer-to-peer (P2P) data transmission when the GPU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ROCm uses the PCIe-ID-based ordering technology for peer-to-peer (P2P) data transmission.  PCIe-ID-based ordering technology is used when the GPU
```

> initiates two write operations to two memory locations. As an example scenario, there are two write operations which needs to be executed in the defined order:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
initiates two write operations to two different memory locations. For example. when there are two write operations which need to be run in this order:
```

1. Write to another GPU memory.

> 2. Write to system memory, to indicate the transfer is complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Write to system memory to indicate the transfer is complete.
```

The two write operations are routed to different locations. However, use of the ordering technology ensures that the order of the operation is maintained. 

For more information on changes implemented in PCIe 3.0, see `Overview of Changes to PCI Express 3.0 <https://www.mindshare.com/files/resources/PCIe%203-0.pdf>`_.

CPUs and I/O devices with PCIe atomics support
------------------------------------------------

> ROCm requires CPUs that support PCIe atomics. Modern CPUs after the release of first generation AMD Zen CPU and Intel™ Haswell support PCIe atomics. Some of the PCIe Endpoints with support beyond AMD Ryzen, AMD EPYC, Intel™ Haswell, or newer CPUs with PCIe 3.0 support are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ROCm requires CPUs that support PCIe atomics. 
```

I'm removing this because this list will go stale.

Author: Incorporated. Since there is no list of supported CPUs and devices, the CPUs and I/O devices with PCIe atomics support section is removed. The only info left "ROCm requires CPUs that support PCIe atomics. Similarly, all connected I/O devices should also support PCIe atomics for optimum compatibility", has been added to PCIe for atomic operations section.

* Mellanox Bluefield SOC

> * Cavium Thunder X2

Reviewer 2: Remove both of these so that the info doesn't go stale.

> Along with the CPUs, all the connected I/O devices should also support PCIe atomics for optimum compatibility and execution of atomic operations. Some of the I/O devices with PCIe atomic support are: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the CPUs, all connected I/O devices should also support PCIe atomics for optimum compatibility. 
```

Again, let's remove the list just so it doesn't go stale

* Mellanox ConnectX-5 InfiniBand Card
* Cray Aries Interconnect

> * Xilinx 7 Series

Reviewer 2: Remove.

.. meta::
   :description: How ROCm uses PCIe atomics
   :keywords: PCIe, PCIe atomics, atomics, AMD, ROCm

*****************************************************************************
How ROCm uses PCIe atomics
*****************************************************************************

> AMD ROCm is an extension of the Heterogeneous System Architecture (HSA). To meet the requirement of an HSA-compliant system, ROCm must support queuing model, memory model, signaling, and synchronization protocols. To learn more about the requirement of HSA-compliant system, see 

Author: There are multiple requirements. Incorporated the feedback.

`HSA Platform System Architecture Specification <http://hsafoundation.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/HSA-SysArch-1.2.pdf>`_.

> When memory operations like queuing, signaling, and synchronization needs to be performed across multiple CPUs and GPUs agents, platform atomics are required. Platform atomics ensures that atomic operations run synchronously without any interruption and conflict across multiple shared resources. Learn how platform atomics are supported in ROCm by Peripheral Component Interconnect Express 3.0 (PCIe™ 3.0).

Author: Accepted and Updated.

Usage of platform atomics in ROCm 
=====================================

> Platform atomics are the set of atomic operations that performs Read Modify Write (RMW) actions across multiple processor, devices, and memory location synchronously without any interruption. Platform atomics used in ROCm are:

Author: Updated. Further confirmation can only be received from SME validation.

* Update HSA queue's ``read_dispatch_id``: 64 bit atomic add used by the command processor on the
  GPU agent. It updates the packet ID it processed.
* Update HSA queue's ``write_dispatch_id``: 64 bit atomic add used by the CPU and GPU agent. It supports multi-writer queue insertions.

> * Update HSA Signals: 64 bit atomic operation used for CPU & GPU synchronization.

Author: Since each operation has different components involved and variables being updated, I feel a list will provide more clarity and help to distinguish.

> Atomic operations

Author: Incorporated

-------------------

> An atomic operation is a sequence of computing instructions that are executed as a single, indivisible unit. These instructions needs to be completed at its entirety without any interruption or should not execute at all. It is a non-posted transaction supporting 32-bit and 64-bit address formats. A successful completion of these operations are identified by response of completion containing the operation result. However, any errors associated with the operation like issue in accessing the target location or executing the atomic operation are signaled to the requester by updating the Completion Status field present in the Completion Descriptor. Depending upon the error, the Completion Status field is updated to Completer Abort (CA) or Unsupported Request (UR).

Reviewer 2: What does "It is a non-posted transaction supporting 32-bit and 64-bit address formats" mean? Specifically, what does "it" refer to? To the atomic operation? Or something else?

```suggestion
An atomic operation is a sequence of computing instructions that are executed as a single, indivisible unit. These instructions are completed in their entirety without any interruptions or are not execute at all. 
```

I don't understand what this section means, nor what its purpose is here. It needs to be clarified and also the language needs to be smoothed out a bit to be more readable:

"A successful completion of these operations are identified by response of completion containing the operation result. However, any errors associated with the operation like issue in accessing the target location or executing the atomic operation are signaled to the requester by updating the Completion Status field present in the Completion Descriptor. Depending upon the error, the Completion Status field is updated to Completer Abort (CA) or Unsupported Request (UR)."

PCIe in ROCm
======================

> AMD ROCm uses atomic RMW transactions that extends inter-processor synchronization mechanisms to Input/Output (I/O) devices starting from  PCIe 3.0. It supports the defined set of HSA capabilities needed for queuing and signaling memory operations. 

Reviewer 2: This is really burying the lede. I would put this info at the very beginning.

> PCIe operates as a completer for atomic operations like:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PCIe operates as a completer for atomic operations such as:  
```

this is a style thing

Author: Rewrote as a paragraph. So no longer valid.

* ``CAS`` (Compare and Swap)
* ``FetchADD``

> * ``SWAP``

Reviewer 2: This doesn't need to be a list. It can be folded into the paragraph.

Author: Accepted

The atomic operations are initiated by the I/O devices that support 32-bit, 64-bit, and

> 128-bit operand. The target address has to be naturally aligned to the operation size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
128-bit operands. The target address has to be naturally aligned to the operation size.
```

"The target address has to be naturally aligned to the operation size." seems to come out of nowhere. It needs contextualization.

Author: Rewrote to provide more context.

To learn more about the industry standards and specifications of PCIe, see `PCI-SIG Specification <https://pcisig.com/specifications>`_

> To learn more about PCIe and its capabilities, see the listed white papers:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn more about PCIe and its capabilities, consult the following white papers:
```

Author: Accepted

* `Atomic Read Modify Write Primitives by Intel <https://www.intel.es/content/dam/doc/white-paper/atomic-read-modify-write-primitives-i-o-devices-paper.pdf>`_
* `PCI express 3 Accelerator White paper by Intel <https://www.intel.sg/content/dam/doc/white-paper/pci-express3-accelerator-white-paper.pdf>`_
* `PCIe Generation 4 Base Specification includes atomic operations <https://astralvx.com/storage/2020/11/PCI_Express_Base_4.0_Rev0.3_February19-2014.pdf>`_
* `Xilinx PCIe Ultrascale White paper <https://docs.xilinx.com/v/u/8OZSA2V1b1LLU2rRCDVGQw>`_

Working of PCIe 3.0 atomic operations in ROCm
-------------------------------------------------

> The PCIe 3.0 atomic operations feature allows atomic transactions to be requested by, routed through, 

Reviewer 2: So up until now we haven't discussed this as being a feature. Are we discussing it as a feature of rocm?

Author: Removed and rewrote

.. meta::
   :description: How ROCm uses PCIe atomics
   :keywords: PCIe, PCIe atomics, atomics, AMD, ROCm

*****************************************************************************

> How ROCm Uses PCIe Atomics

Reviewer 3: https://rocm.docs.amd.com/en/latest/contribute/contributing.html#editing-and-adding-to-the-documentation

https://developers.google.com/style/headings

Please use sentence case @prbasyal-amd
